.TH  caif 7  "November, 2009" "version 0.1" "ST Ericsson"
.SH NAME
CAIF \- CAIF protocol family
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.B #include <caif/caif_socket.h>
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
CAIF socket implements the standard Linux networking
.BR socket (7)
mechanism for communicating with a ST-Ericsson modem using the CAIF protocol.

The programming interface is BSD socket compatible.

A CAIF socket is created by calling the
.BR socket (2)
function as
.BR socket(PF_CAIF ,
.IR socket_type ,
.IB protocol ).

Using
.I socket_type
.B SOCK_SEQPACKET
will provide a reliable CAIF connection. The valid values for
.I protocols
are
.B CAIFPROTO_AT, CAIFPROTO_DATAGRAM, CAIFPROTO_UTIL, CAIFPROTO_RFM.
When a client wants to open a CAIF connection it must call
.BR connect (2).
CAIF socket supports
.BR getsockopt (2),
.BR setsockopt (2),
.BR poll (2),
.BR select (2),
.BR ioctrl (2),
.BR read (2),
.BR write (2),
.BR recv (2),
.BR send (2),
.BR recvmsg (2),
.BR sendmsg (2).

.SH LIMITATIONS
.BR listen (2),
.BR accept (2),
.BR bind (2)
are not supported because CAIF socket only can initiate connections,
but not accept connections.

The error code
.B EMSGSIZE
is returned by the functions
.BR read (2), recv (2),
.BR recvmsg (2)
if the provided buffer is too small to hold the received CAIF message.

.B EMSGSIZE
is returned for
.BR write (2), send (2), sendmsg (2)
if trying to send a message larger than the maximum packet size.

.SH OVERVIEW
In order to use CAIF socket the function
.BR socket (2)
must be called initially.
Then optionally socket operations
can be set with
.BR setsockopt (2),
if no socket options are set default
values will be used. Relevant options are
.BR CAIFSO_CHANNEL_CONFIG,
and for
the utility protocol the socket option
.BR CAIFSO_REQ_PARAM .

The
.BR connect (2)
will send a CAIF channel connect request to the modem.
In blocking mode connect will also wait for the response from the modem.
The CAIF channel connect request is build based on the arguments to
.BR socket (2),
.BR setsockopt (2),
and
.BR connect (2).

After a successful connect, information about the CAIF connection
can be read using
.BR getsockopt (2).
Relevant options for getsockopt are
.B CAIFSO_CHANNEL_ID
to read the unique CAIF channel ID.
For a CAIF utility link
.RB ( CAIFPROTO_UTIL )
.B CAIFSO_RSP_PARAM
can be used to read response parameters.

When connected, CAIF packets can be sent with
.BR send (2),
.BR sendmsg (2),
.BR recvmsg (2),
and read with
.BR read (2),
.BR recv (2),
.BR recvmsg (2).

.SH BLOCKING/NON_BLOCKING
The
.BR fcntl (2)
.BR O_NDELAY " and " O_NONBLOCK
flags (defined in <fcntl.h>) are supported by sockets. If the
.B O_NONBLOCK
flag is set, the socket is put into POSIX-style non-blocking mode.
If the
.B O_NDELAY
flag is set, the socket is put into non-blocking mode. Otherwise,
the socket is put into blocking mode. Blocking mode is the default.
See
.BR socket (7), accept (2), connect (2), recv (2), send (2)
for an explanation of how these forms of non-blocking mode are used.
.SH ADDRESS FORMAT
CAIF is a connection oriented protocol where the address is used to specify
a modem service.
.I family
must always be set to
.BR AF_CAIF .
CAIF addressing is dependent of the protocol specified in the initial
.BR socket (2)
call. The union
.I u
is used according to this.

.nf
struct sockaddr_caif {
	sa_family_t  family;
	union {
		struct {
			u_int8_t type; 	/* type: enum caif_at_type */
		}at;				/* CAIFPROTO_AT */
		union {
			u_int32_t connection_id;
			u_int8_t  nsapi;
		} dgm;				/* CAIFPROTO_DATAGRAM */
		struct {
			char service[16];
		} util;				/* CAIFPROTO_UTIL */
		struct {
			u_int32_t connection_id;
			char      volume[16];
		} rfm;				/* CAIFPROTO_RFM */
	} u;
};
.fi

.SH PROTOCOL TYPES
.TP
.B CAIFPROTO_AT
Specifies an AT channel type.
.B caif_at_type
enum value
.B CAIF_ATTYPE_PLAIN (0)
is the only endpoint type supported.

.TP
.B CAIFPROTO_RFM
Specifies a RFM channel type.
.I connection_id
and
.I volume[16]
must be supplied.
.TP
.B CAIFPROTO_UTIL
Specifies a utility channel type that will connect to a utility service.
.I service[16]
identifies the remote process implementing the service.
.TP
.B CAIFPROTO_DATAGRAM
Specifies a datagram channel type.
.I connection_id
specifies the PDP context connection ID.
.I nsapi
is future functionality.
.TP
.B CAIFPROTO_DATAGRAM_LOOP
Specifies a loopback channel (packet reflector).

.SH SOCKET OPTIONS
CAIF supports some protocol specific socket options that can be set with
.BR setsockopt (2)
and read with
.BR getsockopt (2).
The
.I level
parameter to
.BR setsockopt (2)
or
.BR getsockopt (2)
must be one of the supported protocols defined by the
.B CAIFPROTO_*
enum.

.TP
.B CAIFSO_LINK_SELECT
When muliple CAIF Link layers are available the CAIF socket will
default use the high bandwidth link. But the link selection can
be set explicitly with the socket option
.B CAIFSO_LINK_SELECT.
Either a high bandwidth link can be selected by using
.B CAIF_LINK_HIGH_BANDW
as argument or a low latency link can be selected with argument
.B CAIF_LINK_LOW_LATENCY
This option is of type u_int32_t.
Alternativly to this option SO_BINDTODEVICE can be used.
.TP
.B SO_BINDTODEVICE
can be used to bind a CAIF socket to an named
.I struct ifreq
with element name set to the desired CAIF interface.
.TP
.B SO_PRIORITY
can be used to specify the CAIF Channel priority.
The is used as argument of type int.
The priority must be a between 0 and 31 where 0 is
the lowest priority of the channel.
.TP
.B CAIFSO_REQ_PARAM
For connections of type
.B CAIFPROTO_UTIL
additional request parameters may be supplied with this socket option.
The actual parameters are send using
the struct
.I caif_param.

.nf
struct caif_param {
        u_int16_t size;
        u_int8_t  data[256];
};
.fi
.I size
and
.I data
specifies the request parameter length and value.
.TP
.B CAIFSO_RSP_PARAM
For connections of type
.B CAIFPROTO_UTIL
the modem may supply extra response parameters in the connect response.
.TP
.B CAIFSO_CHANNEL_ID
Every open connection has a unique CAIF connection ID.
This is assigned by the modem and is unique for every CAIF connection in the system.
This socket option allows connection ID (u_int32_t) to be read after a successful connect.

.TP
.B CAIFSO_CHANNEL_CONFIG - DEPREPECATED
When connecting a CAIF socket, the address given in sockaddr_caif is not
the only parameters in the
actual CAIF connect message. It also contains priority on the connection
and specification of which physical link to use for the connection.
If this options is not set default values will be used for the connection.

.nf
struct caif_channel_opt {
        u_int16_t  priority;
        u_int16_t  link_selector;
        char       link_name[16];
};
.fi
The structure
.B caif_channel_opt
is used for the socket option
.B CAIFSO_CHANNEL_CONFIG.
When setting up a CAIF connection the socket option can be used to specify the
priority and the physical link to use for the specific connection.
.I priority
is a number between 0 and 31 where 0 is the lowest priority of the channel.
If
.I link_name[16]
is specified, the connection will use the specified physical link.
Otherwise
.I link_selector
should be set to
.B CAIF_LINK_LOW_LATENCY
for low latency connections and
.B CAIF_LINK_HIGH_BANDW
for high bandwidth connections.

.SH ERROR CODES
.TP
.B [ENOTSUP]
Generally used when using unsupported functionality in the CAIF socket layer.
.TP
.B [EINVAL]
Invalid argument passed.
.TP
.B [EPIPE]
Connection is closed.
.TP
.B [EAGAIN]
Only valid for non-blocking sockets.
Operation would either block or a receive timeout had been
set and the timeout expired before any data were received.
E.g. used for send operations when CAIF channel is in state FLOW-OFF.
.TP
.B [EMSGSIZE]
Sending (
.BR write (2), send (2), sendmsg (2)
)fails with this error code if the message length is less than or equal to 0 or greater than maximum CAIF packet size.

Receiving (
.BR  read (2), recv (2), recvmsg (2)
) fails with this error code if the CAIF packet size is larger than the provided buffer.

.TP
.B [EBADF]
 The argument socket is an invalid descriptor.
.TP
.B [EFAULT]
 The receive buffer pointer(s) points outside the address space of the process.
.TP
.B [EINTR]
 The receive was interrupted by delivery of a signal
 before any data were available.
.TP
.B [ENOBUFS]
The CAIF link layer cannot send packets due to full packet queues or
flow stop. This may indicate that the link layer has stopped sending,
but may be caused by transient congestion.
.TP
.B [ENOTCONN]
 The CAIF socket is not connected (see
.BR connect (2)).
.TP
.B [ENOTSOCK]
 The argument socket does not refer to a socket.
.TP
.B [EOPNOTSUPP]
 The type and/or protocol of the socket does not support the option(s) specified in the flags.
.TP
.B [ENOMEM]
 Insufficient memory is available.


.SH EXAMPLES (1)
.nf
  ...
  struct sockaddr_caif addr = {
    .family = AF_CAIF,
    .u.at.type = CAIF_ATTYPE_PLAIN
  };
  /* Create a CAIF socket for AT Service */
  s = socket(AF_CAIF, SOCK_SEQPACKET, CAIFPROTO_AT);

  /* Connect to the AT Service at the modem */
  connect(s, (struct sockaddr *) &addr, sizeof(addr));
  ...
.fi

.SH EXAMPLES (2)

.nf
 struct sockaddr_caif addr = {
    .family = AF_CAIF,
    .u.util.service = "psock_test",
  };
  struct caif_channel_opt conf = {
    .priority = 10,
    .link_selector = CAIF_LINK_HIGH_BANDW,
  };
  struct caif_param rsp,req = {
    .size = 1,
    .data = {1}
  };
  u_int32_t connid;

  /* Create a CAIF socket for Utility Service */
  s = socket(PF_CAIF, SOCK_SEQPACKET, CAIFPROTO_UTIL);

  /* Set the Channel Options */
  setsockopt(s, SOL_CAIF, CAIFSO_CHANNEL_CONFIG, &conf, sizeof(conf));

  /* Set the Request Parameters on the Utility Link */
  setsockopt(s, SOL_CAIF, CAIFSO_REQ_PARAM, &req, sizeof(req));

  /* Connect to the Utility Service */
  connect(s, (struct sockaddr *) &addr, sizeof(addr));

  /* Read out Parameter Responses and CAIF Connection ID */
  len = sizeof(rsp);
  getsockopt(s, SOL_CAIF, CAIFSO_RSP_PARAM, &rsp, &len);
  len = sizeof(connid);
  getsockopt(s, SOL_CAIF, CAIFSO_CHANNEL_ID, &connid, &len);
.fi
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Sjur Brandeland <sjur.brandeland@stericsson.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) ST-Ericsson AB 2010
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR socket (2),
.BR connect (2),
.BR setsockopt (2),
.BR getsockopt (2),
.BR read (2),
.BR write (2),
.BR recv (2),
.BR recvmsg (2),
.BR send (2),
.BR sendmsg (2)
